blog: DIY: Create Your Own Cloud with Kubernetes (Part 3) blog post (#45498)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-03-11-diy-create-your-own-cloud-with-kubernetes-part-3/index.md

Reviewer: (a bit larger than a nit)
We write headings in sentence case (not Title Case).

Author: Thanks, fixed.

Additionally, I'd like to ask about the types of headings that should be used for `CSI Driver` `CNI Plugin` `Cluster Autoscaler` and `Cloud Controller Manager`

---
layout: blog
title: "DIY: Create Your Own Cloud with Kubernetes (Part 3)"
slug: diy-create-your-own-cloud-with-kubernetes-part-3
date: 2024-03-11
---

**Author**: Andrei Kvapil (Ænix)

Here we are, approaching the most interesting part - running Kubernetes in Kubernetes. In this article, I'll show you technologies such as Kamaji and Cluster API, as well as how to integrate them with KubeVirt.

> In previous articles, we already talked about [how we prepare Kubernetes on bare metal](/blog/2024/01/22/diy-create-your-own-cloud-with-kubernetes-part-1/), and [how to turn Kubernetes into virtual machines management system](/blog/2024/01/22/diy-create-your-own-cloud-with-kubernetes-part-2). This article concludes the series by explaining how, using all of the above, you can build a full-fledged managed Kubernetes and run virtual Kubernetes clusters with just a click.

Reviewer: I've not time for a longer review just now, but: avoid using “we” unless it means _[this article has multiple authors, and they collectively &hellip;]_

Author: fixed, thanks for review

And let's start with the Cluster API.

## Cluster API

Cluster API is an extension for Kubernetes that allows the management of Kubernetes clusters as custom resources within another Kubernetes cluster.

The main goal of the Cluster API is to provide a unified interface for describing the basic entities of a Kubernetes cluster and managing their lifecycle. This enables the automation of processes for creating, updating, and deleting clusters, simplifying scaling, and infrastructure management.

Within the context of Cluster API, there are two terms: **management cluster** and **tenant clusters**.

> - **Management cluster** is a Kubernetes cluster used to deploy and manage other clusters. This cluster contains all the necessary Cluster API components and is responsible for describing, creating, and updating tenant clusters. Often it is used just for this purpose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Management cluster** is a Kubernetes cluster used to deploy and manage other clusters. This cluster contains all the necessary Cluster API components and is responsible for describing, creating, and updating tenant clusters. It is often used just for this purpose.
```

> - **Tenant clusters** are the user clusters or clusters deployed using the Cluster API. Their creation occurs by describing the relevant resources in the management cluster. They are then used for deploying applications and services by end-users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Tenant clusters** are the user clusters or clusters deployed using the Cluster API. They are created by describing the relevant resources in the management cluster. They are then used for deploying applications and services by end-users.
```

(nit) this sounds better

It's important to understand that physically, tenant clusters do not necessarily have to run on the same infrastructure with the management cluster; more often, they are running elsewhere.

{{< figure src="clusterapi1.svg" caption="A diagram showing interaction of management Kubernetes cluster and tenant Kubernetes clusters using Cluster API" alt="A diagram showing interaction of management Kubernetes cluster and tenant Kubernetes clusters using Cluster API" >}}

> For its operation, Cluster API utilizes the concept of providers which are separate controllers responsible for specific components of the cluster being created. Within Cluster API, there are several types of providers. The main ones are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For its operation, Cluster API utilizes the concept of _providers_ which are separate controllers responsible for specific components of the cluster being created. Within Cluster API, there are several types of providers. The main ones are:
```

First instance of the term being described

> For its operation, Cluster API utilizes the concept of providers which are separate controllers responsible for specific components of the cluster being created. Within Cluster API, there are several types of providers. The main ones are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For its operation, Cluster API utilizes the concept of providers which are separate controllers responsible for specific components of the cluster being created. Within Cluster API, there are several types of providers. The major ones are:
```

 - **Infrastructure Provider**, which is responsible for providing the computing infrastructure, such as virtual machines or physical servers.
 - **Control Plane Provider**, which provides the Kubernetes control plane, namely the components kube-apiserver, kube-scheduler, and kube-controller-manager.
 - **Bootstrap Provider**, which is used for generating cloud-init configuration for the virtual machines and servers being created.

To get started, you will need to install the Cluster API itself and one provider of each type. You can find a complete list of supported providers in the project's [documentation](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/providers.html).

For installation, you can use the `clusterctl` utility, or [Cluster API Operator](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-operator) as the more declarative method.

## Our Choice

### Infrastructure Provider

> We have chosen [KubeVirt](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-uratioclusterctlnubevirt) as our Infrastructure Provider because we use KubeVirt and want to run virtual machines for workers directly inside our management cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I have chosen [KubeVirt](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-uratioclusterctlnubevirt) as the Infrastructure Provider because I use KubeVirt and want to run virtual machines for workers directly inside the management cluster.
```

Let's avoid the use of 'We' everywhere; unless it's for targeting a group of authors

Author: @Gauravpadam I've reworked it like this:

> To run Kubernetes clusters using KubeVirt, the [KubeVirt Infrastructure Provider](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-kubevirt) must be installed.
This enables the deployment of virtual machines for worker nodes in the same management cluster, where the Cluster API operates.

- **Stability**: Simplifying architecture by eliminating complex multi-layered deployment schemes. Instead of sequentially launching a virtual machine and then installing etcd and Kubernetes components inside it, there's a simple control plane that is deployed and run as a regular application inside Kubernetes and managed by an operator.
- **Security**: The cluster's control plane is hidden from the end user, reducing the possibility of its components being compromised, and also eliminates user access to the cluster's certificate store. This approach to organizing a control plane invisible to the user is often used by cloud providers.

### Bootstrap Provider

[Kubeadm](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/bootstrap) as the Bootstrap Provider - as the standard method for preparing clusters in Cluster API. This provider is developed as part of the Cluster API itself. It requires only a prepared system image with kubelet and kubeadm installed and allows generating configs in the cloud-init and ignition formats.

> *Overall, we hesitated quite a bit between choosing Talos Linux and Kamaji+Kubeadm for running clusters in Cluster API, but ultimately decided in favor of the latter solution. Primarily because of the ability to run the control plane in containers, rather than in separate virtual machines.*

Reviewer 2: Ideally, make this a one liner - without using 'we'

Author: @Gauravpadam I've reworked it like this:

> It's worth noting that Talos Linux also supports provisioning via the Cluster API and [has](https://github.com/siderolabs/cluster-api-bootstrap-provider-talos) [providers](https://github.com/siderolabs/cluster-api-bootstrap-provider-talos) for this. Although previous articles discussed using Talos Linux to set up a management cluster on bare-metal nodes, to provision tenant clusters the Kamaji+Kubeadm approach has more advantages. It facilitates the deployment of Kubernetes control planes in containers, thus removing the need for separate virtual machines for control plane instances. This simplifies the management and reduces costs.

### How it works

> The primary object in Cluster API is the `Cluster` resource, which acts as the parent for all others. Typically, this resource references two others: a resource describing the **control plane** and a resource describing the **infrastructure**, each managed by a separate provider.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The primary object in Cluster API is the `Cluster` resource, which acts as the parent for all the others. Typically, this resource references two others: a resource describing the **control plane** and a resource describing the **infrastructure**, each managed by a separate provider.
```

Unlike the Cluster, these two resources are not standardized, and their `kind` depends on the specific provider you are using:

{{< figure src="clusterapi2.svg" caption="A diagram showing the relationship of a `Cluster` resource and the resources it links to in Cluster API" alt="A diagram showing the relationship of a Cluster resource and the resources it links to in Cluster API" >}}

> Within Cluster API, there is also a resource named MachineDeployment, which describes a group of nodes, whether they are physical servers or virtual machines. This resource functions similarly to standard Kubernetes resources such as Deployment, ReplicaSet, and Pod, providing a mechanism for the declarative description of a group of nodes and automatic scaling.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Within Cluster API, there is also a resource named `MachineDeployment`, which describes a group of nodes, whether they are physical servers or virtual machines. This resource functions similarly to standard Kubernetes resources such as Deployment, ReplicaSet, and Pod, providing a mechanism for the declarative description of a group of nodes and automatic scaling.

```

{{< figure src="components3.svg" caption="A diagram showing a CSI plugin components installed on both inside and outside of a tenant Kubernetes cluster on a scheme of nested Kubernetes clusters and the mapping of persistent volumes it manages from the parent to the child Kubernetes cluster" alt="A diagram showing a CSI plugin components installed on both inside and outside of a tenant Kubernetes cluster on a scheme of nested Kubernetes clusters and the mapping of persistent volumes it manages from the parent to the child Kubernetes cluster" >}}

### Cluster Autoscaler

The [Cluster Autoscaler](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler) is a versatile component that can work with various cloud APIs, and its integration with Cluster-API is just one of the available functions. For proper configuration, it requires access to two clusters: the tenant cluster, to track pods and determine the need for adding new nodes, and the managing Kubernetes cluster (management kubernetes cluster), where it interacts with the MachineDeployment resource and adjusts the number of replicas.

> Although Cluster Autoscaler is usually run inside the tenant Kubernetes cluster, in this situation, we suggest installing it outside. This is for the same reasons described above. It's simpler and safer; we do not want users of tenant clusters to have any access to the management API of the management cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although Cluster Autoscaler usually runs inside the tenant Kubernetes cluster, in this situation, It is suggested to install it outside. This is for the same reasons described above. It's simpler and safer; we do not want users of tenant clusters to have any access to the management API of the management cluster.
```

{{< figure src="machinedeploymentres.svg" caption="A diagram showing the relationship of a `MachineDeployment` resource and its children in Cluster API" alt="A diagram showing the relationship of a Cluster resource and its children in Cluster API" >}}

To create machines, MachineDeployment refers to a template for generating the machine itself and a template for generating its cloud-init config:

{{< figure src="clusterapi3.svg" caption="A diagram showing the relationship of a `MachineDeployment` resource and the resources it links to in Cluster API" alt="A diagram showing the relationship of a Cluster resource and the resources it links to in Cluster API" >}}

To deploy a new Kubernetes cluster using Cluster API, you will need to prepare the following set of resources:

- A general `Cluster` resource
- A `KamajiControlPlane` resource, responsible for the control plane operated by Kamaji
- A `KubevirtCluster` resource, describing the cluster configuration in KubeVirt
- A `KubevirtMachineTemplate` resource, responsible for the virtual machine template
- A `KubeadmConfigTemplate` resource, responsible for generating tokens and cloud-init

> - At least one `MachineDeployment` to create some workers

Reviewer: We don't put backticks around API kinds.

Author: Ok, I just removed them
